Concurrency and Parallelism
In a multithreaded process on a single processor, the processor can switch execution resources between threads, resulting in concurrent execution. Concurrency indicates that more than one thread is making progress, but the threads are not actually running simultaneously. The switching between threads happens quickly enough that the threads might appear to run simultaneously.

In the same multithreaded process in a shared-memory multiprocessor environment, each thread in the process can run concurrently on a separate processor, resulting in parallel execution, which is true simultaneous execution. When the number of threads in a process is less than or equal to the number of processors available, the operating system's thread support system ensures that each thread runs on a different processor. For example, in a matrix multiplication that is programmed with four threads, and runs on a system that has two dual-core processors, each software thread can run simultaneously on the four processor cores to compute a row of the result at the same time.

Semaphore: Use a semaphore when you (thread) want to sleep till some other thread tells you to wake up. Semaphore 'down' happens in one thread (producer) and semaphore 'up' (for same semaphore) happens in another thread (consumer) e.g.: In producer-consumer problem, producer wants to sleep till at least one buffer slot is empty - only the consumer thread can tell when a buffer slot is empty.

Mutex: Use a mutex when you (thread) want to execute code that should not be executed by any other thread at the same time. Mutex 'down' happens in one thread and mutex 'up' must happen in the same thread later on. e.g.: If you are deleting a node from a global linked list, you do not want another thread to muck around with pointers while you are deleting the node. When you acquire a mutex and are busy deleting a node, if another thread tries to acquire the same mutex, it will be put to sleep till you release the mutex.

Spinlock: Use a spinlock when you really want to use a mutex but your thread is not allowed to sleep. e.g.: An interrupt handler within OS kernel must never sleep. If it does the system will freeze / crash. If you need to insert a node to globally shared linked list from the interrupt handler, acquire a spinlock - insert node - release spinlock.

Src: https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E18752_01/html/816-5137/mtintro-25092.html
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4039899/when-should-we-use-mutex-and-when-should-we-use-semaphore